Add guide for how to choose software dependencies when writing workflows, packages, etc that we expect to be used many times (#9)
Arcadia-Science/arcadia-software-handbook: guides-and-standards/guide-choosing-software-dependencies.md

## Deciding when your task meets the re-use bar

**When working on a software tool or workflow you anticipate that you or another Arcadian will use multiple times, you need to be careful about which tools you include**. This is _not_ the same as a workflow that documents the steps taken in an analysis project and is often bespoke and specific to a given task. Examples of existing tools or workflows where we should be careful about the quality of tools we use include:

- nf-core-style Nextflow workflows like [NovelTree](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/noveltree), [PreHGT](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/prehgt), and [reads2genome](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/reads2genome)
- Snakemake workflows written as re-usable tools like [ProteinCartography](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/ProteinCartography/)
- Python packages like [plm-utils](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/2024-plm-utils).
- Tools designed to analyze experimental data in high throughput like [arcadia-phenotypeomat-protocol]([https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/arcadia-phenotypeomat-protocol)

## Things to look for when deciding to include a tool as a dependency

> A dependency is any software tool that is required to make your tool work. For example, BLAST is a dependency of ProteinCartography, and Nextflow and OrthoFinder are dependencies of NovelTree. Below we include some signals for assessing whether a software tool is high quality.

Reviewer: I get that technically, yes, Nextflow is a dependency of our workflows that use this, but since this sentence starts with the examples of BLAST, I think it's confusing to talk about dependencies as both tools to run steps and the underlying workflow orchestration. Since the rest of this seems to hover around BLAST-like dependencies, I would take out Nextflow from here

Author: done!

> ### Critical — we can’t use the tool if these criteria are not met

Reviewer 2: Nit: slightly clearer phrasing
```suggestion
### Critical criteria (we can’t use the tool if it does not meet these criteria)
```

- **The tool has a license and the license is permissible for commercial use.** Common licenses like BSD2, BSD3, GPL3, and MIT can all be used. Some other licenses can be used as well.

>   - Hint: you can search for the word "commercial" in the license. This will often take you to text about whether the software can be used commercially. If it can’t, it will usually say something like "for non-commercial use only."

Reviewer 3: I'd add a note just for completeness: "If unsure, ping Katie"

> - **The tool can be run on the command line without human input.** A Graphical User Interface (GUI) (including web applications like Streamlit) is not required to run the tool. The tool isn’t encoded in notebooks.

Reviewer: Maybe expand on the notebook requirement? We've used ColabFold for example for different projects and that's technically a tool encoded in notebooks if you want to run it on Google Colab

Author: what do you think I should add here? I think ColabFold would be a very bad thing to include as a dependency for a high-throughput or software tool because of the requirement to use in in Google colab. It's really good to test an analysis, but if we want to scale up the thing, we'll have to come up with a different solution if ColabFold is the answer.

Reviewer: ah sorry, I think my brain shifted from how to implement a tool in a high-throughput workflow vs just being able to use it at all. Here, I'm not sure what to recommend if you want to create something reusable because, especially for accessing GPUs, Colab would be an easier way to share/reuse/launch than somebody setting up an instance for GPUs. I think there's sometimes an intermediate point between making something for a one-off and making a fully reproducible workflow/tool since we sometimes aren't sure if the effort to make it fully high-throughput would be worthwhile. I'm sort of thinking about the PPI analysis I did, it would be easy for somebody to set that up and get going themselves, and then we assess over time if we make a different, more high-throughput solution. This might beyond the scope of this guide, but those are the thoughts I have.

Author: ya i see your point. I'll leave this comment open for now...at the very least we would want people going in eyes-wide-open that if they go with the colab approach, it will take some substantial refiguring to turn something into a computational workflow one day (which is totally fine i think as long as it is on someones radar and part of the discussion)

Reviewer 3: I think Colabfold actually is fine in the critera Taylor described. The Colabfold notebook is the equivalent of a convenient streamlit app. If you want to you can install Colabfold via conda and run it via Snakemake or Nextflow or even locally. And they probably even offer Docker containers, but I know it's pip/conda installable.

- **The tool can be run on a Linux platform.** This is a requirement\* for things dockerization and for running on AWS.
  - *It’s not actually a*requirement\* — the Mac operating systems can’t really be dockerized, but Windows can. Similarly, there are Windows operating systems on AWS but these are sometimes annoying to use.

> ### Important — think carefully before proceeding with the tool if these criteria are not met

Reviewer 2: Nit: more rephrasing for clarity
```suggestion
### Important criteria (think carefully before proceeding if the tool does not meet these criteria)
```

> - **The software code is on GitHub or another popular developer platform like GitLab or BitBucket.** Using these platforms signals that the tool is open source and likely versioned. Sometimes you'll find code on SourceForge. This is ok and potentially workable, but not the best. Sometimes you'll find code in the supplement of a paper. This is not awesome and probably signals that the tool will be hard to install or use but you can still try if you really want to.

Reviewer 2: I would make this a bit more concrete by explaining *why* code found only on sourceforge and in supplements is not ideal and how to go about deciding when to use it anyway (e.g. there's a tradeoff between how essential and unique the code is for the project and how difficult it will be to install in an automated way).

Author: added, thank you!

- **The tool is easily installable.** To be able to use a tool, we need to be able to install it. Below I’ve included somewhat arbitrary gradations of what makes something easy to install. You can check these things by eye to quickly see if you think a tool will be installable, but often the best way to determine this is to install and use the tool.
  - Very easy: cross-platform installation as a conda package

>   - Easy: installable from another package repository with another package manager like pip (python) or `install_packages()` (R)

Reviewer: Maybe mention `poetry` here as well just to match what Keith has previously written?

Author: added!

  - Somewhat easy: Installable from GitHub with a package manager

>   - Somewhat easy: Has a dockerfile and an available Docker container

Reviewer 2: Nit: not sure what is meant by "available docker container" but I think the dockerfile is the important part (since containers are ephemeral)

>   - Somewhat difficult: has an environment yaml file or requirements.txt file that lists versioned dependencies and has installation instructions that involve cloning the repository

Reviewer: My personal opinion, but I think for most Arcadians cloning a repository and creating an environment based on a yaml/requirements.txt file would be easier than dockerfile/Docker container. Trying to help a couple people install and run Docker on their machines I've learned is difficult.

Author: hmm yes i agree, but I'm thinking of ease of porting the installation over to a high throughput workflow like thing such as nextflow. If someone likes a tool that is run in docker and can test it, its easier to port this over to something that can run on AWS batch eventually. Given that, should i amend this?

Reviewer: Oh I see, yeah then I would keep that the same. Again I think my brain was shifting while reading this between if it can it just be used reproducibly vs in a larger high-throughput tool. Maybe some justification at the beginning of this could be added to clarify that? And in theory if somebody were to go through this guide, who is the audience/decision maker they are keeping in mind? Are the people mentioned, for example, vetting out tools so they themselves can build a workflow or suggest to somebody like you or myself to build a workflow implementing that tool?

Author: kk i'll add some justification in the beginning to make this more clear.

Author: actually --  im not sure how to make this more clear looking at the doc. do you have any suggestions for how this should change?

Reviewer: I think if at the beginning you added a line about how a possibility could be incorporating that tool into a workflow or package that isn't meant to be bespoke, that adds some clarification how this guide is for decision making around tools that need to be run many times. That justification is also in the second section, but I think putting it right at the beginning makes it clear what types of work people should make these decisions for.

Author: added "In these sorts of projects, we expect that the tools we use may one day be incorporated into a workflow or package" as the second sentence!

  - Difficult: git clone & compile from source
  - Difficult: No installation instructions

> ### Nice — but not necessary if you’re willing to do the leg work to make sure the tool works

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Criteria that are nice to have (but not necessary if you’re willing to do the leg work to make sure the tool works)
```

- **The tool has tests.** Tests ensure the accuracy and quality of a software tool. See [this AUG](https://training.arcadiascience.com/arcadia-users-group/20231104-testing-concepts/lesson/) for more about software tests.
  - Hint: tests will often be a `test/` or `tests` folder, either in the root of the repository or
- **The software is maintained.**

>   - Hint: there is a difference in the timestamp between the first and last commit and the last commit occurred recently (~months)

Reviewer 2: Maybe also mention here to look for a history of closed PRs and at the "insights" page on GitHub (particularly the "contributors" tab, which shows contributions over time).

  - Hint: there are responses to issues
- **The software is well-written.**
  - Hint: no `.DS_Store` files visible in any folder of the repository

>   - Hint: the repository has a reasonable structure

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Hint: the repository has a reasonable structure with clear and descriptive filenames.
```

>   - Hint: the software is written in functions

Reviewer 2: Maybe make this more general. Something like "the code is well-organized, includes comments and docstrings, and appears to be readable."

  - Hint: there are no absolute paths in the software
  - Hint: the software is packaged with or has documentation for obtaining demo data so you can quickly try to run the tool.

> - **Other people use the software.** This signals that other people believe in the method and that other people were able to install and use the software.

Reviewer 3: This + maintenance honestly may be more important than this category. I'd consider moving them up. I think this is potentially less reliable in bioinformatics, but in the world of application development, GitHub activity (issues, commits) + stars is pretty high signal

Author: would you like these moved up to the top of this section or into the previous section?

Reviewer 3: Probably previous section

  - Hint: the GitHub repository has a lot of stars
  - Hint: the paper publishing the software has been cited frequently by other projects that used the tool.

> ## Ideas for finding quality software

Reviewer 2: Maybe also mention searching for repos directly on Github (may not be obvious to people that this is possible).

- Search [conda](https://anaconda.org/anaconda/repo), [PyPI](https://pypi.org/), or other software package repositories with keywords relevant to your task. The search engines for different software package repositories are different so your mileage will vary. However, if you can find a tool this way, the chances are good that it will be easy to install and mediocre that the software will be high quality.
- Search Google Scholar with your keywords plus "GitHub." This may highlight studies that have published software. You can filter to recent papers or select papers that are highly cited.

> - Look at the [nf-core modules](https://github.com/nf-core/modules) repository. If a tool makes it into that repo, it can be dockerized, installed on Linux, run on the command line, and is usually fairly high quality. Make sure to check the license to make sure you can use the tool. While you're there, you can look to see if an existing [nf-core workflow](https://github.com/nf-core) already meets your full analysis needs.

Reviewer: Since docker is mentioned here, maybe mention biocontainers and/or quay.io? There's a small amount of people I would imagine that would need to know that, but might change over time

Author: i'll switch to "containerized" so it isn't specific

> - Look at the [nf-core modules](https://github.com/nf-core/modules) repository. If a tool makes it into that repo, it can be containerized, installed on Linux, run on the command line, and is usually fairly high quality. Make sure to check the license to make sure you can use the tool. While you're there, you can look to see if an existing [nf-core workflow](https://github.com/nf-core) already meets your full analysis needs.

Reviewer 3: I'd change this a little bit. In my experience, the quality of nf-core modules is not always consistently high. Though it's true that at least they're containerized and runnable on Linux.

Author: if I remove "and is usually fairly high quality" do you think that's good? I think I was trying to say that the tool itself is probably high ish quality (for scientific software), not necessarily that the module is.

Reviewer 3: Yeah that's fine!

## Deciding when your task meets the re-use bar

**When working on a software tool or workflow you anticipate that you or another Arcadian will use multiple times, you need to be careful about which tools you include**. This is _not_ the same as a workflow that documents the steps taken in an analysis project and is often bespoke and specific to a given task. Examples of existing tools or workflows where we should be careful about the quality of tools we use include:

- nf-core-style Nextflow workflows like [NovelTree](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/noveltree), [PreHGT](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/prehgt), and [reads2genome](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/reads2genome)
- Snakemake workflows written as re-usable tools like [ProteinCartography](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/ProteinCartography/)
- Python packages like [plm-utils](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/2024-plm-utils).

> - Tools designed to analyze experimental data in high throughput like [arcadia-phenotypeomat-protocol]([https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/arcadia-phenotypeomat-protocol)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Tools designed to analyze experimental data in high throughput like [arcadia-phenotypeomat-protocol](https://github.com/Arcadia-Science/arcadia-phenotypeomat-protocol)
```

## Things to look for when deciding to include a tool as a dependency

A dependency is any software tool that is required to make your tool work. For example, BLAST is a dependency of ProteinCartography and OrthoFinder is a dependency of NovelTree. Below we include some signals for assessing whether a software tool is high quality.

### Critical criteria (we can’t use the tool if it does not meet these criteria)

- **The tool has a license and the license is permissible for commercial use.** Common licenses like BSD2, BSD3, GPL3, and MIT can all be used. Some other licenses can be used as well.
  - Hint: you can search for the word "commercial" in the license. This will often take you to text about whether the software can be used commercially. If it can’t, it will usually say something like "for non-commercial use only." If you're unsure, reach out to Katie.
- **The tool can be run on the command line without human input.** A Graphical User Interface (GUI) (including web applications like Streamlit) is not required to run the tool. The tool isn’t encoded in notebooks.

> - **The tool can be run on a Linux platform.** This is a requirement\* for things dockerization and for running on AWS.

Reviewer 4: The wording seems a little confusing, although I'm not sure this suggestion is much better.
```suggestion
- **The tool can be run on a Linux platform.** This is a requirement\* for things needing dockerization and for running on AWS.
```

  - Difficult: git clone & compile from source
  - Difficult: No installation instructions
- **The software is maintained.**
  - Hint: there is a difference in the timestamp between the first and last commit and the last commit occurred recently (~months)
  - Hint: there are responses to issues
  - Hint: look for a history of closed Pull Requests
  - Hint: look at the "insights" page on GitHub. The "contributors" tab will show contributions over time
- **Other people use the software.** This signals that other people believe in the method and that other people were able to install and use the software.
  - Hint: the GitHub repository has a lot of stars
  - Hint: the paper publishing the software has been cited frequently by other projects that used the tool.

### Criteria that are nice to have (but not necessary if you’re willing to do the leg work to make sure the tool works)

- **The tool has tests.** Tests ensure the accuracy and quality of a software tool. See [this AUG](https://training.arcadiascience.com/arcadia-users-group/20231104-testing-concepts/lesson/) for more about software tests.

>   - Hint: tests will often be a `test/` or `tests` folder, either in the root of the repository or

Reviewer 4: I'm unclear if this `or` is supposed to contain more, or if it's a segue to the next bullet point. It seems odd to have it be to introduce the next section since it's under this specific hint, but maybe that's just me.

Author: oh nope, this is just an unfinished sentence that snuck through. Thank you for catching this!
